
PT J
AU Agarwal, V
AF Agarwal, Vinita
TI Whole person healthcare as social and environmental justice: new
   research directions toward a paradigmatic integration of an ecological
   whole system medicine framework
SO FRONTIERS IN COMMUNICATION
LA English
DT Article
DE whole person healthcare; whole system medicine; social justice;
   environmental justice; human health; planetary health
ID LIFE-STYLE MEDICINE; PATIENT; MODELS
AB With increasing recognition of the interdependencies of human and planetary health, calls for a socially and environmentally just framework of health have centered on whole person healthcare (WPHC) approaches. This perspective piece proposes an argument for broadening the definition of human health from WPHC to one that is guided by the philosophical orientation of traditional whole system medicine (WSM) approaches, undergirded by the values of social and environmental justice, and supported by the practices of an allopathic-integrative medicine-based WPHC framework. This piece presents opportunities for praxis offered by a WSM-WPHC framework to address global inequity, environmental disparities, and sustainability challenges. An ecological WSM-WPHC framework envisages social and environmental justice in material and discursive ways by foregrounding environmental planetary ecological consciousness as constitutive of human consciousness and biopsychosocial composition. It argues for structural support through formalized programmatic pathways targeting funding opportunities and mechanisms that invite investigations addressing epistemic challenges of expanding definitions of evidence constituting basic science knowledge domains beyond mechanistic, causal, and formative paradigms. Furthermore, it calls for innovative research directions examining the integration and validation of evidence-based approaches incorporating the ontologically diverse and epistemically distinct ontological orientation of WSM and clinical approaches. A WSM-WPHC framework that positions human health within the parameters of social and environmental justice principles envisions the material enactment of the practice of health and medicine as a universal planetary value.
C1 [Agarwal, Vinita] Salisbury Univ, Dept Commun, Salisbury, MD 21801 USA.
C3 University System of Maryland; Salisbury University
RP Agarwal, V (corresponding author), Salisbury Univ, Dept Commun, Salisbury, MD 21801 USA.
EM vxagarwal@salisbury.edu
NR 51
TC 0
Z9 0
U1 0
U2 0
PU FRONTIERS MEDIA SA
PI LAUSANNE
PA AVENUE DU TRIBUNAL FEDERAL 34, LAUSANNE, CH-1015, SWITZERLAND
EI 2297-900X
J9 FRONT COMMUN
JI Front. Commun.
PD MAR 27
PY 2024
VL 9
AR 1346699
DI 10.3389/fcomm.2024.1346699
PG 7
WC Communication
WE Emerging Sources Citation Index (ESCI)
SC Communication
GA NE3P7
UT WOS:001198741300001
OA gold
DA 2024-02-08
ER